[Doc] Improve the documentation for profiler (#3014)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/lang/articles/misc/profiler.md

# Profiler

## Overview
High-performance numerical computation is one of the design priorities of Taichi. We provide a series of profilers
to quantify the performance of Taichi programs, help analyze where the bottleneck occurs, and thus facilitate users
optimizing their code. These profilers collect both hardware and Taichi-related information and can also be used as
performance debugging tools for developers.

> The fellows are profiling tools Taichi provides now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The follows are profiling tools Taichi provides now:
```

> - `ScopedProfiler` is used to analyze the performance of the Taichi compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ScopedProfiler` is used to analyze the performance of the Taichi JIT compiler (host).
```

> - `KernelProfiler` shows the performance of Taichi kernels, and detailed hardware metrics in its advanced mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `KernelProfiler` shows the performance of Taichi kernels (device), with detailed low-level performance metrics (such as memory bandwidth consumption) in its advanced mode.
```

## ScopedProfiler
`ScopedProfiler` tracks the time spent on **host tasks** such as JIT compilation.

1. This profiler is automatically on.
2. Call `ti.print_profile_info()` to display results in a hierarchical format.

For example:

```python
import taichi as ti

ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
var = ti.field(ti.f32, shape=1)

@ti.kernel
def compute():
    var[0] = 1.0
    print("Setting var[0] =", var[0])

compute()
ti.print_profile_info()
```

:::note
`ScopedProfiler` is a C++ class in the core of Taichi. It is not exposed to Python users.
:::

## KernelProfiler

`KernelProfiler` acquires kernel profiling records from the backend, counts them in Python-scope, and displays the results by printing them.

1. To enable this profiler, set `kernel_profiler=True` in `ti.init`.
2. To display the profiling results, call `ti.print_kernel_profile_info()`. There are two modes of printing:

>     - In `'count'` mode (default mode), records with the same kernel name are counted as a profiling result,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In `'count'` mode (default), records with the same kernel name are counted as a profiling result,
```

[  5.59% |    0.248  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[100.00%] Total kernel execution time:   0.004 s   number of records:  9
=========================================================================
=========================================================================
X64 Profiler(count)
=========================================================================
[      %     total   count |      min       avg       max   ] Kernel name
[100.00%   0.033 s    100x |    0.244     0.329     2.970 ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[100.00%] Total kernel execution time:   0.033 s   number of records:  1
=========================================================================
```

:::note
Currently the result of `KernelProfiler` could be incorrect on OpenGL backend due to its lack of support for `ti.sync()`.
:::

### Advanced mode
For the CUDA backend, `KernelProfiler` has an experimental GPU profiling toolkit, Nvidia CUPTI, which provides low and
deterministic profiling overhead and is able to capture more than 6000 hardware metrics.

> Prerequisites to use CUPTI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerequisites to using CUPTI:
```

# Profiler

## Overview

> High-performance numerical computation is one of the design key application domains of Taichi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

High-performance numerical computation is one of the key application domains of Taichi.
```

(not sure if I understood the sentence correctly...)

Author: Probably because I merged the previous suggestion `key application domains` but haven't deleted `design`.

We provide a suite of profilers
to quantify the performance of Taichi programs, help analyze where the bottleneck occurs, and thus facilitate users
optimizing their code. These profilers collect both hardware and Taichi-related information and can also be used as
performance debugging tools for developers.

The follows are profiling tools Taichi provides now:
- `ScopedProfiler` is used to analyze the performance of the Taichi JIT compiler (host).
- `KernelProfiler` shows the performance of Taichi kernels (device), with detailed low-level performance metrics (such as memory bandwidth consumption) in its advanced mode.

> ## ScopedProfiler

Reviewer 2: nit: remember to put a newline under the headers :)

`ScopedProfiler` tracks the time spent on **host tasks** such as JIT compilation.

1. This profiler is automatically on.
2. Call `ti.print_profile_info()` to display results in a hierarchical format.

For example:

```python
import taichi as ti

ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
var = ti.field(ti.f32, shape=1)

@ti.kernel
def compute():
    var[0] = 1.0
    print("Setting var[0] =", var[0])

compute()
ti.print_profile_info()
```

:::note
`ScopedProfiler` is a C++ class in the core of Taichi. It is not exposed to Python users.
:::

## KernelProfiler

> `KernelProfiler` acquires kernel profiling records from the backend, counts them in Python-scope, and displays the results by printing them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`KernelProfiler` acquires the kernel profiling records from the backend, counts them in Python-scope, and prints the results to the console.
```

1. To enable this profiler, set `kernel_profiler=True` in `ti.init`.
2. To display the profiling results, call `ti.print_kernel_profile_info()`. There are two modes of printing:
    - In `'count'` mode (default), records with the same kernel name are counted as a profiling result,
    and then presented in a statistical perspective.
    - In `'trace'` mode, the profiler shows you a list of kernels that were launched on hardware during the profiling period.
    This mode provides more detailed performance information and runtime hardware metrics for each kernel.
3. To clear records in this profiler, call `ti.clear_kernel_profile_info()`.

> For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example:

```

# Profiler

## Overview

High-performance numerical computation is one of the key application domains of Taichi.

> We provide a suite of profilers to quantify the performance of Taichi programs, help analyze where the bottleneck occurs,

Reviewer 3: nit: to quantify..., to help analyze...

and thus facilitate users optimizing their code. These profilers collect both hardware and Taichi-related information
and can also be used as performance debugging tools for developers.

> The follows are profiling tools Taichi provides now:

Reviewer 3: Currently, Taichi provides the following providing tools:

- `ScopedProfiler` is used to analyze the performance of the Taichi JIT compiler (host).
- `KernelProfiler` shows the performance of Taichi kernels (device), with detailed low-level performance metrics (such as memory bandwidth consumption) in its advanced mode.

## ScopedProfiler

`ScopedProfiler` tracks the time spent on **host tasks** such as JIT compilation.

1. This profiler is automatically on.
2. Call `ti.print_profile_info()` to display results in a hierarchical format.

For example:

```python
import taichi as ti

ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
var = ti.field(ti.f32, shape=1)

@ti.kernel
def compute():
    var[0] = 1.0
    print("Setting var[0] =", var[0])

compute()
ti.print_profile_info()
```

:::note

> `ScopedProfiler` is a C++ class in the core of Taichi. It is not exposed to Python users.

Reviewer 3: nit: better not discourage Python users. Maybe for Python profiling one can use...?

Author: How about we briefly note ` `ScopedProfiler` is a C++ class in Taichi. `

:::

## KernelProfiler

`KernelProfiler` acquires the kernel profiling records from the backend, counts them in Python-scope, and prints the results to the console.

1. To enable this profiler, set `kernel_profiler=True` in `ti.init`.
2. To display the profiling results, call `ti.print_kernel_profile_info()`. There are two modes of printing:

>     - In `'count'` mode (default), records with the same kernel name are counted as a profiling result,

Reviewer 3: nit: (default), profiling records...

sorry, `records` seems a confusing concept for new readers... maybe better to conjugate with `profiling record`.

>     and then presented in a statistical perspective.

Reviewer 3: and then the statistics are presented.

    - In `'trace'` mode, the profiler shows you a list of kernels that were launched on hardware during the profiling period.
    This mode provides more detailed performance information and runtime hardware metrics for each kernel.
3. To clear records in this profiler, call `ti.clear_kernel_profile_info()`.

For example:

```python {3,13}
import taichi as ti

ti.init(ti.cpu, kernel_profiler=True)
x = ti.field(ti.f32, shape=1024*1024)

@ti.kernel
def fill():
    for i in x:
        x[i] = i

for i in range(8):
    fill()
ti.print_kernel_profile_info('trace')

> ti.clear_kernel_profile_info() # clear all records

Reviewer 3: nit: maybe also highlight this line?

for i in range(100):
    fill()
ti.print_kernel_profile_info() # default mode: 'count'
```

The outputs would be:

```
=========================================================================

> X64 Profiler(trace)

Reviewer 3: i just notice this. `X64 Profiler` seems quite generic... What we have is actually a `Taichi Profiler running on X64 architecture`, or?

Author: fixed in #3049 , thanks!

[  6.06% |    0.269  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
[  5.73% |    0.254  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
[  5.68% |    0.252  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
[  5.61% |    0.249  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
[  5.63% |    0.250  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
[  5.61% |    0.249  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
[  5.59% |    0.248  ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[100.00%] Total kernel execution time:   0.004 s   number of records:  9
=========================================================================
=========================================================================
X64 Profiler(count)
=========================================================================
[      %     total   count |      min       avg       max   ] Kernel name
[100.00%   0.033 s    100x |    0.244     0.329     2.970 ms] fill_c4_0_kernel_1_range_for
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[100.00%] Total kernel execution time:   0.033 s   number of records:  1
=========================================================================
```

> :::note

Reviewer 3: should this be a note or a warning?

Currently the result of `KernelProfiler` could be incorrect on OpenGL backend due to its lack of support for `ti.sync()`.
:::

### Advanced mode

> For the CUDA backend, `KernelProfiler` has an experimental GPU profiling toolkit, Nvidia CUPTI, which provides low and

Reviewer 3: ...has an experimental GPU profiling toolkit, which is based on the Nvidia CUPTI that has low and deterministic profiling overhead, and is able...

deterministic profiling overhead and is able to capture more than 6000 hardware metrics.

Prerequisites to using CUPTI:
1. Install CUDA Toolkit.
2. Add environment variable:
    `export CUDA_TOOLKIT_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/cuda` to your shell configuration files such as `~/.bashrc` and `~/.zshrc`.
3. Build Taichi from source with CUDA toolkit:
    `TAICHI_CMAKE_ARGS="-DTI_WITH_CUDA_TOOLKIT:BOOL=ON" python3 setup.py develop --user`.
4. Resolve privileges issue of Nvidia profiling module (run with `sudo` to get administrative privileges):
    Add `options nvidia NVreg_RestrictProfilingToAdminUsers=0` to `/etc/modprobe.d/nvidia-kernel-common.conf`.

>     Then `reboot` should resolve the permision issue (probably needs running `update-initramfs -u` before `reboot`).

Reviewer 3: Suggest to also point to [this page](https://developer.nvidia.com/nvidia-development-tools-solutions-err_nvgpuctrperm-permission-issue-performance-counters)
